=== [1] swecris:2023-00991_Forte | 2024 | EUR 0.44M | Forte
TITLE: The role of living conditions on health and longevity: A longitudinal analysis of children who grew up in Northern Sweden during the 1920s and 1930s
RULES: Keyword evidence for age_related_disease (0.75) and social_population_aging (0.714) is too close to call (margin 0.036 < 0.3; relative margin 0.048 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
Due to a very low standard of living in northern Sweden in the early 20th century, a large
socio-medical survey was conducted on nutrition, health and living conditions among school children
in Västerbotten and Norrbotten in 1929/30. During their lives, these children came to experience an
improved and equalized standard of living. Despite an historical social and economic equality in the
1980´s, large geographical differences in mortality were noted in some areas of Väster- and
Norrbotten in relation to other parts of Sweden. Research shows that early living conditions affect
health later in life, however, it is more debated to what extent improved living conditions outweigh
initial disadvantages.Research problem and specific questions The aim of the project is to study the
importance of living conditions in childhood for well-being and longevity in adulthood. Can improved
and more equal living conditions in adulthood mediate any disadvantages caused by poor living
conditions in childhood? or do poor living conditions in childhood cause a cumulative disadvantage
over the entire life cycle? Many of those affected by CVD mortality in the 1980s experienced poverty
and malnutrition as children. The state also ran a eugenic policy that worsened the schooling for
children from the reindeer-herding Sami population, often living in Väster- and Norrbotten. Data and
method The project uses the digitized material from the socio-medical survey 1929/30. Through a
longitudinal design with links to population and death registers, we investigate whether there are
connections between childhood upbringing conditions, socioeconomic status in adulthood and life
expectancy and cardiovascular mortality. Societal relevance and utilisation The generation studied
in the project lived during a period when cardiovascular disease increased. Despite this, historical
research on the period, based on analyzes of micro data, is limited. Besides this, questions about
early childhood living conditions are important in order to be able to make early interventions to
promote greater equality in the health of the population. Plan for project realisation We will first
investigate what factors that matter most for wellbeing in childhood. In the second step, we examine
whether social and geographical mobility might mediate the effects of negative living conditions in
childhood.

=== [2] swecris:2023-00147_Forte | 2023 | EUR 0.43M | Forte
TITLE: Patterns of stress across the life course and their role in mental health and loneliness in older adults
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Research problem and specific questionsPopulation aging in Sweden and worldwide makes it essential
to increase our knowledge of mechanisms underlying older peoples’ mental health and loneliness to
identify preventive strategies. Stress has a clear impact on mental health. Yet, little is known
about how different stressors (experiences that cause stress) in different contexts throughout the
life course impact mental health problems and loneliness in older adults. Moreover, the
stress-mental health-loneliness nexus throughout the life course is not well understood. The overall
goal of this project is to better understand how exposure to different kinds of stressors across the
life course is associated with mental health and loneliness in older adults. What are the relations
between stressors, mental health, and loneliness across the life course? Are there ways to
counteract the negative impact of stressors through social resources and lifestyle factors?Data and
methodLongitudinal data will be used to assess age-based and life-long stressors: childhood e.g.,
family conflicts, adulthood e.g., work stressors, late adulthood e.g., conflict with children or
grandchildren, and stressors that may play a role from childhood to older age, e.g., financial
strain, death of relatives, loved ones, or close friends. Outcomes: anxiety, depressive symptoms,
self-reported psychiatric disorder, quality of life, suicidal thoughts, and perceived loneliness.
Importantly, we will also study how social resources and lifestyle factors can impact these
associations, and the role that gender and socioeconomic position play across the life course.
Advanced statistical modelling will be used, e.g., structural equation models and growth curve
models.Relevance and utilisationThis project aims to identify at-risk groups and modifiable factors
that can buffer against stress. The results can support practical recommendations on
stress-buffering factors that can be implemented at strategic points in the life course, which can
be promoted at a societal level, and, ultimately, help to reach the goals of sustainable and healthy
aging for all.Plan for project realisationThe researchers have extensive knowledge of the proposed
data sets, as well as access to them. The main costs for the project are for salaries. We will work
in close collaboration with Dr. Martin Hyde from Swansea University. To enable this, costs are
included in the budget for several research visits during the project period.

=== [3] swecris:2014-03381_VR | 2015 | EUR 0.43M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: New understanding of motor control and falls by novel postural sway analysis, robotics and mathematical modelling
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Falls and fear of falling pose major threats to health and independence among elderly people. Our
objective is to gain further knowledge regarding balance control aspects on fall risk and fear of
falling by 1) assessing postural sway and control mechanisms in static and dynamic tests, 2)
creating a robotic humanoid with artificial muscles and electronic control systems and 3)
establishing a mathematical formulation of balance control and experimentally evaluate it on the
robotic humanoid. This will be undertaken by a close co-operation between Physiotherapy and
Automatic Control researchers. A sample of voluntary elderly people will be studied in a movement
analysis laboratory as for postural sway which will be analyzed using frequency analysis. Further,
we will design and evaluate formal mathematical models based on these observations. Constructing a
humanoid robot designed to mimic human biomechanics and motor control system will allow us to test
various motor control theories and also to investigate the effects on the postural control and
postural sway when perturbations, sensory and motor reductions and noise is experimentally
introduced, mimicking physiological changes related to aging. Finally, we plan to back-test findings
by validating them in new laboratory trials on elderly volunteers. This novel research initiative,
combining two scientific disciplines, can create important new knowledge of great value for
prediction and prevention of falls and fear of falls.

=== [4] swecris:2018-02579_VR | 2019 | EUR 0.43M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Altered dNTP pools and genome instability
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
The purpose of this project is to determine how changes in the pool of dNTPs – the building blocks
of DNA – affect the stability of nuclear and mitochondrial genomes, aging, and the development of
diseases and how manipulation of the dNTP pool might lead to useful therapeutic interventions. The
dNTP pool is tightly regulated in all cells because changes in the dNTP pool result in genetic
instability and various human disorders. By introducing mutations in the genes responsible for the
production or degradation of dNTPs, we have created several novel strains of mice with altered dNTP
pools. Using these strains and our technical expertise in dNTP metabolism, I will investigate how
mutations in the dNTP-synthesizing and dNTP-degrading enzymes affect the stability of mouse nuclear
and mitochondrial genomes during development and aging, whether the dNTP levels in different mouse
organs can be manipulated by exogenously supplied dNTP precursors (deoxyribonucleosides), and
whether disorders caused by defects in dNTP production can be treated. Answering these questions
will have important implications for understanding the mechanisms of genetic instability caused by
the defects in dNTP metabolism and will potentially lead to new treatment therapies for disorders
caused by altered dNTP pools.

=== [5] swecris:2018-02712_VR | 2019 | EUR 0.43M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: On the developmental origins of life-long B lineage complexity
RULES: Keyword evidence for fundamental_aging (0.875) and age_related_disease (0.857) is too close to call (margin 0.018 < 0.3; relative margin 0.021 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
Weak antibody response at the extremes of age is in part due to changes in the composition of B cell
subsets rendering infants and the elderly highly vulnerable to infections. Furthermore, B cell
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is a disease of the aged and the most prevalent leukemia in the
western world with disputed cellular origin. Despite this, B cell heterogeneity and its dynamic
changes with age remains an underexplored frontier in the immunology field. Using a combination of
lineage tracing mouse models, B cell receptor (BCR) repertoire sequencing and gene expression
profiling approaches, this proposal peels back the layers of the complex adult B cell compartment,
based on developmental timing and hematopoietic cellular origin. Our concept rests on the
fundamental notion that the adaptive immune repertoire is shaped by developmental determinants that
are subject to age dependent changes. Our approach, taking advantage of the slow turnover rates of
certain B cell subsets of fetal / neonatal (early life) origin, allows us to resolve B cell
heterogeneity as a function of time with previously unattainable resolution. The implications of
this proposal extend beyond normal B cell development and function to immunosenescence,
leukemogenesis and healthy ageing.

=== [6] swecris:2019-01252_Forte | 2019 | EUR 0.43M | Forte
TITLE: THE TIMES THEY ARE A-CHANGIN´ - MANAGING CHANGE IN HEALTHCARE TO RETAIN AND ATTRACT COMPETENCE
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Swedish healthcare is facing psychosocial work environment problems with high staff turnover,
absenteeism and poor job satisfaction, leading to increasing difficulties to retain and attract
competent healthcare personnel. This development threatens conditions for ensuring a sustainable
competence development. Change is pervasive in healthcare. Changing disease patterns, ageing
populations, new discoveries of treatment of diseases, technological advancements, new technologies
and business models, political reforms and policy initiatives place demands on healthcare
professionals’ capacity to implement change. Change can be a stressor because it creates uncertainty
for individuals. This project investigates organizational and workplace changes and potential change
fatigue, i.e. overwhelming feelings of stress and exhaustion associated with changes affecting one’s
work, as an underlying explanation for the psychosocial work environment problems seen in Swedish
healthcare. Recent and on-going research by researchers behind this application points to the utmost
relevance of change fatigue for psychosocial work environment problems. The goal of this project is
to investigate how, why and the extent to which workplace and organizational changes of relevance
for healthcare personnel may generate change fatigue and what strategies can be used to reduce
change fatigue. More specifically, the aim is to understand and explain causes, consequences and
strategies concerning change fatigue among physicians, registered nurses, assistant nurses and
managers in Swedish healthcare. The research project is original. Research thus far has not
investigated how, why or the extent to which change fatigue among healthcare staff in different
settings may influence psychosocial work environment problems related to retaining and attracting
competent healthcare personnel. This knowledge is critically important to understand how change
initiatives can best be planned and implemented.

=== [7] swecris:2019-01548_VR | 2020 | EUR 0.43M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Cell-specific somatic mutagenesis and its implications for tissue dysfunction and aging
RULES: Keyword evidence for age_related_disease (0.651) and fundamental_aging (0.642) is too close to call (margin 0.009 < 0.3; relative margin 0.014 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
The purpose of our research is to develop an increased knowledge for specific genetic and molecular
factors that affect the onset of age-related diseases and affect health and disease. Over a
lifetime, the human body is vulnerable to a vast number of intracellular and external mutagenic
forces. In the last years, DNA sequencing have revealed genetic variations among cells within an
individual, “somatic variance”. Data generated from these studies provide a window into the genome
evolution during the lifespan of an individual. We have started to develop a genetic atlas of
somatic mutations across various cells of the human body. This atlas help us to improve the
understanding of genetic events in cancer development and age-associated disease, and to better
understand the mutational processes that lead to differences in the somatic mutation landscape in
different cells. Our research also focus on the analysis of the functional implications from somatic
mutations using a murine model for somatic mutagenesis, and the analysis of somatic mutations in
common age-associated diseases. The impact of our studies might be beneficiary towards healthier
aging, and the identification of treatments to alleviate age-associated disease. The time plan for
the proposed projects are 4 years.

=== [8] swecris:2020-01426_VR | 2021 | EUR 0.43M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Transcription factors in Parkinson´s disease
RULES: Keyword evidence for age_related_disease (0.885) and fundamental_aging (0.826) is too close to call (margin 0.059 < 0.3; relative margin 0.067 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the loss of midbrain
dopaminergic neurons (mDAs). The treatment of PD is currently symptomatic and there is no cure.
Transplantation of human midbrain fetal tissue has provided proof of concept that cell replacement
therapy can change the course of disease.The cause of PD is largely unknown. 10% of the cases have a
genetic cause, but most of them are thought to arise from the interaction between genetic and
environmental risk factors. By integrating PD-GWAS and scRNA-seq data we recently found that
transcription factors and regulators (TF/Rs) in mDAs are associated to PD (Bryois et al, 2020, Nat
Genetics). We previously found that PBX1, a TF required for the development and maintenance of mDAs,
is nearly lost in PD (Villaescusa et al, 2016, EMBO).Here we propose to: 1) Identify changes in the
expression and regulation of TF/Rs in PD brain tissue and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
using single cell technologies (LaManno et al, 2016, Cell). 2) Determine their function and
contribution to PD by CRISPR activation and repression in iPSCs. 3) Use TF/Rs to generate
disease-resistant mDAs for cell replacement in PD models, by transplantating human pluripotent stem
cell-derived mDA progenitors, or by in vivo reprogramming of brain astrocytes (Rivetti et al, 2017,
Nat Biotech).This project will increase our understanding of the role of TF/Rs in PD and will
develop novel cell replacement strategies for PD.

=== [9] swecris:2025-01377_VR | 2025 | EUR 0.42M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Skin Deep: A Transdisciplinary Study of Ageing, Beauty, and Wrinkles
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
The skin, the body´s largest organ, is a protective barrier and a social boundary between
individuals and their surroundings. Increasingly, it is also a projection surface for commercial
interests, as treatments such as Botox, fillers, and energy-based technologies develop. This project
critically examines the societal impact of non-invasive cosmetic treatments by analyzing how
wrinkles, as markers of ageing, are constructed, experienced, and commodified. Using an
interdisciplinary approach, it explores the socio-cultural meanings of ageing skin, the role of
digital technologies in shaping beauty norms, and the commercialization of anti-ageing treatments.
The study employs qualitative methods, including interviews, ethnographic fieldwork, and media
analysis, to investigate how individuals navigate aesthetic expectations and how the beauty industry
shapes perceptions of ageing. By bridging theories of affect, biopolitics, and digital aesthetics,
this research contributes to discussions on embodiment, self-regulation, and the evolving
relationship between humans and technology. The findings offer new perspectives on how beauty ideals
are negotiated across demographic groups and how emerging technologies reinforce or challenge
aesthetic hierarchies. In doing so, the project highlights how skin is positioned at the
intersection of biological, cultural, and economic forces, raising important questions about agency,
normativity, and bodily autonomy.

=== [10] swecris:2023-00150_Formas | 2023 | EUR 0.42M | Formas
TITLE: Seniors’ housing and mobility in small cities and rural areas in Sweden – socially sustainable housing, mobility chains and housing provision in small municipalities.
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Using insights from a large-scale quantitative study and one qualitative interview study this
project aims to uncover the extent to which political decisions on the national level, the regional
and local organization of welfare services and individuals’ preferences affect residential mobility
patterns among elderly in rural and semi-rural municipalities in Sweden. Through the two work
packages this project will answer to the need of strategies among smaller municipalities for an
increased in-mobility of younger households. How does the abolishment of the real estate taxation in
Sweden relate to mobility patterns among elderly? What type of qualities do elderly articulate about
life and housing outside larger cities and what social, economic and emotional needs are necessary
for a good life for this group? By answering these questions the project will point towards parts of
municipal organization and activities necessary to create attractive and sustainable housing
environments in multi-family housing in smaller municipalities. Vacancies in smaller housing units
stemming from the mobility of older cohorts towards multi-family housing may increase
attractiveness, thus increasing in-mobility of younger groups. In-mobility of younger households to
depopulating small communities is key to increase social and economic sustainability. The aim of the
project is to find new ways for effective use of the current housing stock and towards sustainable
communities beyond areas of growth.

=== [11] swecris:2019-01104_Forte | 2019 | EUR 0.41M | Forte
TITLE: RELOC-AGE: How Do Housing Choices and Relocation Matter for Active Ageing?
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Housing choices and relocation as people age are hot topics in the housing industry and care
sectors, as well as in the public policy and debate realm. However, the scientific knowledge base is
insufficient, and approaches to solutions are not based on evidence. Challenging the notion of
ageing-in-place, the RELOC-AGE project will generate ground-breaking knowledge on housing choices
and relocation as related to active ageing. The objectives of this multistage mixed methods
participatory project are to:1. Study housing choices and relocation and examine the effects on
active ageing among people aged 55+ considering relocation (Prospective RELOC-AGE).2. a) Develop a
novel housing counselling intervention promoting active ageing. b) Investigate the feasibility of
the new intervention (Intervention RELOC-AGE).3. Contribute to theory development explaining the
complex relationships among housing choices, relocation and active ageing (Theory RELOC-AGE).In
collaboration with confirmed housing provision, senior citizens’ organisation and municipality
partners throughout, this interdisciplinary project includes state-of-the-art as well as novel
project-specific methodology. For Prospective RELOC-AGE we will recruit people aged 55+ considering
housing choices and relocation and follow them using quantitative and qualitative data collection
methods over time, as they move or not, thus observing how attitudes and strategies related to
housing choices and the actual transitions taking place are associated with active ageing. Based on
existing knowledge and the evolving results, we will develop a novel housing counselling
intervention and test it for feasibility in authentic municipality settings. Subsequently, the
integrated findings will feed into a theory development endeavour. This project will generate new
and much asked for knowledge, which will nurture future research as well as housing policies and
practices, not only in Sweden but also internationally.

=== [12] swecris:2014-02196_VR | 2015 | EUR 0.41M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Thinking, moving, and falling: Early detection of fall-prone phenotypes as targets for primary interventions - a translational study
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Current guidelines for assessment of fall risk in older persons only include screening for severe
cognitive impairment. However, even small deficits in specific cognitive domains may interfere with
an older person´s ability to compensate for somatic disorders. Three research aims are described in
this proposal: 1) Verify how to define and predict a motor-cognitive risk phenotype at high risk for
adverse outcomes (such as fall-related injuries, disability, and institutionalization) in
non-demented and non-disabled older adults. 2) Construct and validate a multifactorial index for
assessment of fall risk that enables early detection of fall-prone phenotypes that can be targets
for primary interventions. 3) Test and implement the index in clinical settings. The first and
second aims will be achieved using longitudinal data from the Swedish National study on Aging and
Care in Kungsholmen, in which data on 3363 participants were gathered at the beginning of the study
and every 3 or 6 years thereafter through interviews and clinical examinations by trained staff. The
third aim will be achieved via collaboration with geriatric clinics in the Stockholm area. The index
will help clinicians identify older persons at increased risk for fall-related injuries at an early
stage, when primary interventions are likely to be beneficial. Furthermore, the risk factors
identified by using the index may be optimal targets for individualized treatment to avoid or
postpone adverse outcomes.

=== [13] swecris:2017-02217_VR | 2018 | EUR 0.41M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Cognition, brain, and aging (COBRA): Longitudinal analyses
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
This application concerns the first follow-up in the Cognition, Brain, and Aging (COBRA) project.
COBRA is a 10-year longitudinal study, with three measurement occasions separated by five years. The
baseline sample (n = 181) includes healthy persons between 64 and 68 years of age. A key focus is
the link between dopamine (DA) and cognitive aging. We use different techniques to measure DA D2
receptors as well as structural and functional brain-imaging data. Cognitive performance and
numerous life-style variables are also thoroughly assessed. Previous cross-sectional evidence
suggests large decreases in various DA markers across the life span, and that DA and other brain
parameters mediate cognitive deficits in aging. However, a major flaw in the literature is that the
bulk of work on brain and cognitive aging is cross-sectional. Only a longitudinal design can
estimate within-person changes and between-person differences in rate of change. This is
particularly troublesome regarding DA availability in the human brain, where there are no
longitudinal data at all. Thus, we simply do not know whether the cross-sectional data reflect true
age changes. Although the baseline assessment reveals several intriguing findings on the link
between brain and cognition in aging, only time will tell whether these links are meaningful. Thus,
the present project, which covers data collection and analyses for the first 5-year follow-up in
COBRA, holds promise to produce truly unique data.

=== [14] swecris:2019-01076_Forte | 2019 | EUR 0.41M | Forte
TITLE: Mental health in old age: the role of social disadvantages throughout the life course and across birth cohorts
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Depression in late life demands urgent attention, due to its severe consequences for the
individuals, their families, and the healthcare systems. It is a multifactorial disorder that likely
occurs as a result of an interplay between social and biological factors unfolding throughout the
entire life-course. This proposal seeks to reveal life-course pathways to depression in older
adults. Specifically, we aim to (1) identify the most suitable life-course model for the association
between lifelong social disadvantage and depression in late life, (2) establish if the association
between social disadvantage over the life-course and depression in late life is mediated by the
burden of multiple somatic conditions in old age, and (3) assess if somatic burden mediates the
association between social disadvantage and depression differently across the birth cohorts varying
in their exposure to contextual factors. To achieve these aims, we rely on the expertise of a
multidisciplinary team of researchers, as well as the high quality of the data from the Swedish
National study on Aging and Care in Kungsholmen (SNAC-K). Using this rich material, we generate
multiple measures of social disadvantage over the life course, as well as somatic burden (including
its vascular and metabolic clusters) in old age. We follow a population of 3,363 individuals aged 60
years or older for more than 15 years to detect incident depression and examine trajectories of
depressive symptoms over time. The data will be analyzed using modern tools for longitudinal
analysis, including mixed effects and generalized structural equation models, whereas a gender
perspective will be featured in all analyses. The results of this project will inform public health
policies aimed at alleviating the impact of social disadvantages on mental health, allowing the
interventions to be implemented in individuals with the highest risk and at a time in life when it
matters the most.

=== [15] swecris:2025-00030_Forte | 2025 | EUR 0.41M | Forte
TITLE: Participative intervention for a sustainable working life for nursing assistants - the largest occupational group in Sweden
RULES: Keyword evidence for care (1.0) and social_population_aging (0.944) is too close to call (margin 0.056 < 0.3; relative margin 0.056 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
Research problem and specific questionsNursing assistants represent the largest occupational group
in Sweden but suffer from high sickness absence, often linked to ergonomic risks, as well as
chemical exposure that can lead to respiratory issues. These factors contribute to poor health and
high turnover rates, with 60% considering leaving the profession. This project aims to address the
following questions:Can targeted information about workplace risks increase awareness and reduce
harmful exposure?Can a staff-driven intervention, based on a workplace risk assessment, reduce
sickness absence and work-related hazards?Data and methodThis project employs an interdisciplinary
approach with quantitative and qualitative data. Nursing assistants in care homes will wear
measurement equipment to monitor ergonomic strain and chemical exposure during their work shifts.
Interviews will be conducted to identify barriers and opportunities for safer work practices, while
sickness absence data will also be collected. Surveys will be used to gather data from a larger
sample (n=300), including information on chemical exposure, ergonomics, self-reported health,
workload, and stress. Based on these findings, a participatory intervention will be implemented to
improve the work environment. Follow-up measurements, surveys, and sickness absence data will
evaluate the intervention’s effectiveness.Societal relevance and utilisationThis project addresses
pressing challenges in eldercare, a sector critical for an aging population. Every improvement will
significantly impact society due to the large workforce. Enhancing working conditions for nursing
assistants will lead to reduced sickness absence, increased job satisfaction, and a more sustainable
workforce. Findings will be disseminated through scientific publications, public events, and
collaboration with trade unions, employers’ organisations, and other relevant stakeholders to ensure
practical implementation.Plan for project realisationThe project will be carried out in three
phases:Data collection and analysis: Baseline measurements, interviews, and surveys will identify
existing risks.Intervention: Based on the data collected, improvement measures will be developed and
implemented in collaboration with staff and management.Evaluation and dissemination: Follow-up
measurements and analyses will assess the effects of the intervention. Results will be shared with
various stakeholders to promote broader changes within the sector.

=== [16] swecris:P2021-90095_Energi | 2022 | EUR 0.40M | Swedish Energy Agency
TITLE: Plastics in electric machines: Ageing mechanisms and the development of new sustainable solutions
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
To improve the electric machine performance, knowledge needs to be obtained on how the local
environment affects and age the wire insulation and other plastic parts. This is an important part
of the project, which will enable an optimized choice of plastic components, oil-additives and
cooling. The project involves companies from every important tier level; one producing passenger
vehicles, one producing commercial vehicles (trucks and buses), a plastics producer, and a producer
of transmission oil. RISE KIMAB will lead the project, KTH will be the academic partner. The wire
material is obtained from a Swedish producer. Part of the project consists of making a lab scale
equipment that allows for accelerated testing of the plastics in relevant environments. The project
will also involve scale-up testing in a small machine/prototype motor. A specific work package will
focus on involving biobased plastic and oil in the future electric machine.

=== [17] swecris:2019-02620_VR | 2020 | EUR 0.40M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: How to deal with environmental change – the impact of three major environmental events on prehistoric coastal societies and their main prey species
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
How did prehistoric societies deal – culturally and economically – with environmental change? We
propose a novel, cross-disciplinary study on how humans used culture as a means to handle sudden
environmental change, and detect different patterns of human behaviour in prehistoric coastal
societies in the Baltic Sea area. We focus on three major global environmental events, with
different longevity and impact: the 8200 cal BP cold event in the Mesolithic, the 4200 cal BP
aridification event in the Neolithic and the 536 AD dust-veil event in the Migration Period. These
have been associated with cultural shifts worldwide, but not previously in the Baltic Sea Region. By
integrating studies on archaeology, bioarchaeology, marine mammal ecology and environment, we will
show how the prehistoric environment entangled with both human culture and marine mammal ecology,
affecting each other both ways. Main questions: (1) How did humans deal culturally with
environmental/climatic change? (2) How do marine mammal populations in the Baltic Sea fluctuate
under the impact of both human hunting pressure and major environmental changes? To answer these, we
will study dietary shifts, mobility and changes in material culture and technology in coastal
populations to infer how they dealt with different environmental/climatic change, as well as study
demography in seals. To detect detailed temperature fluctuations caused by such events we will
analyse skeletal remains of both humans and seals.

=== [18] swecris:2021-00526_Forte | 2022 | EUR 0.39M | Forte
TITLE: Being an older person with drug addiction – a qualitative study of the living conditions of a growing group
RULES: Keyword evidence for care (2.667) and social_population_aging (2.556) is too close to call (margin 0.111 < 0.3; relative margin 0.042 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
There is a need to put focus on older persons with long-term drug problems. Currently, there is a
lack of knowledge about this group´s life situation and need for support. International as well as
Swedish studies indicate that this is a growing group that will require significant care resources.
There is a need for increased knowledge about older drug users in social services, healthcare and
elderly care, in order to adapt treatment and services to this group.The aim of this project is to
study the life situation of older persons with long-term drug problems in Sweden, with a focus on
the importance of aging. We will analyze issues related to everyday life and living conditions,
social relations, drug use and risk management as well as physical and mental health. We will also
study the group´s experiences of contact with care authorities and organizations, as well as their
perceived need for support.In the project, we integrate theories from research on ageing and
research on addiction problems: the lifestyle perspective that emphasizes the functions and meanings
of drug use, the life course perspective that highlights how relationships and interactions with the
environment are shaped by previous experiences, and the concept of ageism focusing on how older
people are being discriminated against because of stereotypical beliefs about old age. A gender
perspective is important for studying how living conditions and opportunities may differ between
women and men.The study is based on qualitative methods. We will conduct semi-structured interviews
with a strategic selection of older persons with long-term drug problems. We strive for an even
distribution between women and men. Recruitment will take place at services that target different
groups of older drug users - treatment facilities, housing units, low-threshold activities - to
achieve variation in the sample.

=== [19] swecris:2020-01220_VR | 2021 | EUR 0.39M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: It´s the hormones. Women in transitions through hormone narratives
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
It´s the hormones: Women in transitions through hormone narrativesWhat do stories about hormones do
to our contemporary understanding of women? The purpose of the project is to study how hormones are
ascribed significance in popular understandings, and narrations of transitional periods in women´s
lives. More particularly, the aim is to explore hormone narratives as part of contemporary self-help
culture, where the hormonal body has become a popular object of discussions and regulatory
practices. Hormones are part of a growing self-help industry, with a high pressure on optimizing
"human capital". A critical examination of its effects is necessary, and something that the project
will contribute to. The project will be conducted by an interdisciplinary research group of three
gender scholars, with vast experience of research on self-help, narratives, ageing, temporality and
gender normativity. To get answers on the overall question the study will include group-interviews
with women as well as media material and self-help books. The research group will work in close
collaboration and write five articles, including one special issue on hormone narratives. The
results will be presented in research- and popular science contexts. Working from the supposition
that knowledge in all its forms have real effects, the project contributes with knowledge about how
hormone narratives structure women´s everyday practice and self-understandings.

=== [20] swecris:20220202_KKS | 2023 | EUR 0.38M | The Knowledge Foundation
TITLE: Utforskande av grannskapseffekter på åldrande: en möjlighet att förbättra hjärnans hälsa under hela livslängden
RULES: Keyword evidence for age_related_disease (1.0) and social_population_aging (1.0) is too close to call (margin 0.0 < 0.3; relative margin 0.000 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
FORSKNINGSPROBLEM OCH SPECIFIKA FRÅGOR. I takt med att befolkningen blir allt äldre, det blir vikten
av att förstå det lokala grannskapets egenskaper och dess påverkan på äldre invånare allt viktigare.
Det gäller aspekter som grannskapets effekter på hjärnans hälsa och livslånga hälsosamma beteenden
samt dess betydelse för att nå de hållbara utvecklingsmålen. Detta projekt syftar till att besvara
två huvudsakliga forskningsfrågor: (1) Ur ett ekologiskt perspektiv, vilka är sambanden mellan
socioekonomisk status på samhällsnivå och trender i demensincidensen i Sverige under de senaste
decennierna? (2) Kan vi identifiera en åldersvänlig stadsdel genom att undersöka grannskapets
kompenserande effekt på patienter, dess kopplingar till kognitiva fördelar, och dess inverkan på
livslångt hälsofrämjande? METOD OCH SAMFINANSIERANDE FÖRETAG. Den första forskningsfrågan kommer att
undersökas genom att SEKOM-indexet kopplas till lokalt aggregerade hälsodata i Sverige mellan 2007
och 2022. För att besvara den andra forskningsfrågan kommer epidemiologiska kohorter från en
riskpopulation (SWEDEHEART), två ålderspopulationer (SCAPIS och SLOSH MRI) och en med fokus på
arbetslivet (HPA) att genomföras för att noggrant analysera sambanden mellan grannskapets
socialekonomiska och fysiska egenskaper med hälsoresultat för hjärnan samt hälsosamt beteende. De
socialekonomiska aspekterna av grannskapet kommer att utvärderas genom SEKOM indexen och de fysiska
aspekterna av grannskapet kommer att bedömas utifrån dess grönområden samt nivåer av buller och
luftföroreningar. Vi kommer att samarbeta med företagen Statisticon AB, Tyréns Sverige AB, och
Health Profile Institute AB,för att samproducera kunskap och produkter. PLAN FÖR
PROJEKTFÖRVERKLIGANDE. All akademisk verksamhet inom detta fyraåriga projekt kommer att utföras av
en multidisciplinär forskargrupp bestående av en postdoktor, en datavetare och fyra seniora
forskare. För att underlätta projektplaneringen kommer Statisticon AB att tillhandahålla
SEKOM-indexen för att bedöma grannskapets socialekonomiska komponenter och Tyréns Sverige AB kommer
att bistå oss i utforskandet av grannskapets fysiska komponenter. Health Profile Institute AB kommer
att ställa en unik arbetskohort (HPA) till vårt förfogande för att hjälpa oss att förstå sambanden
mellan grannskapets utmärkande drag och livslång hälsa och beteenden. RELEVANS OCH SAMPRODUKTION.
Det långsiktiga målet med det föreslagna projektet är att påverka miljöpolitik, samhälle, folkhälsa
och akademi, med inriktning på åldersvänliga stadsdelar. Parallellt med att ny vetenskaplig kunskap
genereras inom detta projekt kommer de tre medverkande företagen att kunna utveckla sina produkter
och arbetsstrategier, till exempel genom att uppdatera SEKOM, ta fram en stadsplaneringsstrategi med
fokus på att skapa hälsosamma stadsdelar för äldre samt utarbeta hälsofrämjande strategier baserat
på vissa specifika kvarter.

=== [21] swecris:2018-01053_VR | 2019 | EUR 0.38M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Intergenerational care in Sweden. A study of relationships, commitments, and practices of care in everyday family life.
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Practices of care between grandparents, adult children and grandchildren are the hub of
intergenerational relationships. To care for an elderly parent, or for a grandchild, is an
engagement that can be a necessity coming out of lack of other care providers, or it can be an
engagement you voluntarily take upon yourself. It can feel like an obligation, and/or as something
you do out of love for your kin, it can be experienced as demanding and time-consuming, or as
rewarding and emotionally fulfilling.This project will study intergenerational care in everyday life
and throughout the life course in Sweden. Since the beginning of the 20th century, publicly funded
elderly- and child care has made individuals less dependent on relatives for care support. However,
quantitative studies indicate that intergenerational involvement has increased in recent decades,
but there is no comprehensive research on configurations of intergenerational care. This proposed
qualitative study will analyze practices and significance of care in three generations:
grandparents, their adult children, and their grandchildren. Through the use of original research
design and innovative methods (diary- and biographical interviews, visual methods) it will make
possible the capturing of practices and understandings of care between generations and in the same
family. It will be a novel contribution to research on families and care, and enable internationally
comparable analysis on care in changing welfare states.

=== [22] swecris:2016-02616_Vinnova | 2016 | EUR 0.38M | Vinnova
TITLE: Innovative quality assured fayalite slag products (IQSLAG)
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Purpose and goal: The purpose of the project was to ensure the quality of products based on
iron-silicate slag through deepened knowledge on parameters that influences the environmental and
technical properties of the slag and potential new application areas. Results from bench- and full
scale trials show potential new application areas through modification of the slag composition.
Fundamental understanding of phases and conditions that have an impact on leaching contributes to
quality assured products in addition to the constructed testbed for ageing studies. Expected results
and effects: Results from lab scale tests show that hydraulic properties can be achieved through
modification of the slag composition, which open new application areas. Extensive characterization
has contributed to enhanced knowledge of different phase’s contribution to leaching during various
conditions. These studies in combination with data from the testbed will contribute to assurance of
qualitative slag products. Outcome of the project will contribute to a resource efficient use of raw
materials. Approach and implementation: The project has been carried out in close collaboration
between the participants. Fundamental studies has been conducted as a PhD study, a licentiate thesis
will be presented based on the studies within the project. Planning, conducting and evaluation of
full scale trials have been carried out in collaboration between the participating partners. Prior
full scale trials theoretical calculations and lab scale trials was conducted as an aid for
planning. Collaboration will continue among other to follow up results from the test bed and for
on-line measurements.

=== [23] swecris:2022-01804_VR | 2023 | EUR 0.38M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Cognition, brain, and aging (COBRA): 10-year longitudinal follow-up
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
The Cognition, Brain, and Aging (COBRA) project is a 10-year longitudinal study, with three
measurement waves separated by five years. The main focus is on the link between brain dopamine (DA)
and cognitive aging. We use different brain-imaging techniques to measure DA D2 receptors as well as
structural and functional brain parameters. Cognitive performance (working memory, episodic memory,
speed) is thoroughly tested, and genetic and life-style variables are assessed. The baseline sample
included healthy persons between 64-68 years of age (N=181), and 129 of these returned for the
second wave. We have analysed the cross-sectional and two-wave longitudinal data and several
interesting findings on the role of DA in cognitive aging have been made, including intriguing
evidence that cross-sectional estimates do not correctly reflect true age-related changes. The
present application concerns the third wave of assessment. A third wave increases statistical power,
enables estimation of non-linear changes, and improves the validity of inferences on lead-lag
associations, and is therefore of vital importance for realizing the COBRA research aims. Given the
central role of DA in motor, emotional, and cognitive processes, knowledge on true DA changes in
aging, and individual differences therein, will be of relevance to many scientific areas.

=== [24] swecris:2017-00183_Forte | 2018 | EUR 0.38M | Forte
TITLE: Strengthening community-based health systems through e-health innovations? a realist evaluation of Virtual Health Rooms in northern Sweden
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Ageing populations with multifaceted health needs have shifted thinking away from hospi-centric
approaches towards more flexible models of care. E-health innovations have the potential to improve
access to person-centred care and strengthen community-based health systems.A recent innovation,
referred to as Virtual Health Rooms (VHRs), is located within community structures and makes use of
sophisticated technology to provide health services to remote rural areas. It is implemented through
new partnerships between municipalities, county councils, community structures and patients.The
overall aim of the research is to understand the circumstances under which e-health innovations in
community-based health care delivery help achieve gains in access to care and strengthen health
systems. This project is particularly interested in e-health innovations for elderly in rural areas.
Using the case of VHRs in South Lapland we will address the gap in understanding of how such
innovations might enhance integration between health systems partners, partnerships between the
system and the community, and access to health services.We will implement a multiple case study and
apply a realist evaluation by 1) developing an initial programme theory which suggests an
explanation of how the e-health innovation improves access to health services for the elderly as
well as strengthening community-based health systems, 2) testing of the initial programme theory
through multiple case studies, 3) identifying the contextual conditions and mechanisms which lead to
positive outcomes (access, integration and partnership) and 4) finally suggest a middle range theory
that lead to recommendations to guide further implementation of VHRs. This project is part of an
ongoing strong collaboration between Umeå University and the Västerbotten County Council which
provides true opportunities for action learning and close interactions between researchers, decision
makers and practitioners.

=== [25] swecris:20241194_HLF | 2025 | EUR 0.37M | Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation
TITLE: Predicting chronic airway disease; a life-course approach
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Background: The lungs start to develop during pregnancy and continue to grow and mature during the
first 20-25 years of life. Thereafter, lung function declines due to physiological lung ageing. This
lung function trajectory can be affected by host factors including diseases and exposures across the
entire life-course. Sub-normal trajectories are associated with poorer health-outcomes, not only
chronic airway disease (e.g. asthma and COPD) but also cardio-vascular and metabolic health, as well
as premature death. Aims: The overall aim is to better predict chronic airway disease across the
life-course. Here we propose that lung function charts could be used both for children and adults to
monitor lung health status with time. To this end, we have recently introduced our freely available
online Lung Function Tracker tool. Going forward, we hypothesize that 1) lung function trajectory
modelling and long-term risk prediction of chronic airway disease will be improved by incorporating
individual-level clinical, lifestyle and environmental data in the models 2) systemic biomarkers
measured early in life provide prognostic values for long-term disease risk up to adulthood 3)
genetics and upper airway methylation and gene expression data will give insight into mechanisms
related to onset and progression of chronic airway disease As such, the specific aims in this
project are: 1) To improve current lung function trajectory and risk prediction models for chronic
airway disease by incorporating individual-level data 2) To identify single or combinations of
systemic biomarkers measured early in life that associate with chronic airway disease 3) To identify
omics features that correlate with, and predict chronic airway disease Workplan: The BAMSE study
with data from 4089 participants followed from birth to age 28 years will be our primary cohort for
data analysis and hypothesis testing. Blood samples, biomarkers and omics as well as clinical and
lung function data are available from repeated follow-ups. Thanks to our long-term national and
international collaboration, we will reach out to other cohorts for replication and validation of
results, including SCAPIS. Significance: The expected outcome of the project is to develop a new
prediction tool that reliably may predict long-term individual lung function trajectory and
asthma/COPD risk; to identify biomarkers for early disease detection, and to elucidate mechanisms of
chronic airway disease.

=== [26] swecris:2022-01155_Forte | 2023 | EUR 0.37M | Forte
TITLE: Development and feasibility of a digital intervention for common mental health problems among older adults
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Research problem and specific questionsWorldwide increases in longevity and falling fertility rates
have created significant demographic transformations in society. As a consequence, the proportion of
older adults (defines as &gt;65 years) in the world is greater than ever before. We purport to
develop an accessible, preventive intervention that can be delivered to older adults with early,
subclinical/mild symptoms of varying forms of mental health problems. When developed, it could be
easily implemented in primary care, in geriatric clinics and all other sites frequented by older
adults, whether in India or Sweden.Research questions are:Is the culturally adapted digital
intervention Healthy Ageing with Mental Health safe and feasible to use among older adults in Sweden
and India?What is the experience of older adults in Sweden and India using the digital
intervention?What preliminary effect does the digital intervention have on outcomes (e.g. quality of
life, depression, anxiety, sleep problems, alcohol use, somatic health)?Data and methodWe propose to
develop and systematically evaluate the digital intervention Healthy Ageing with Mental Health which
aims to provide psychoeducation and prevention of common mental health problems among older adults
in Sweden and India. Plan for project realisationThe intervention will be based on cognitive
behavior therapy and consist of four weekly self-help modules focusing on 1) low mood 2) anxiety and
somatic symptom preoccupation, 3) sleep and circadian rhythm and 4) addictive habits (including use
of prescription medications). Psychoeducation about the importance of physical activity, nutrition
and how these may interact with mental health problems will be an integral part of the intervention,
as will information about ageism.RelevanceThe intervention developed in this project will address
not one but several common mental health problems among older adults. The bilateral aspect of the
project will provide further important insights into how digital interventions may be adapted to
older adults in both collectivist and individualistic cultures, where one central difference is the
view on older adults.

=== [27] swecris:2025-06686_VR | 2025 | EUR 0.36M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Modulation of polyclonal antibody responses and Its Long-Term Role in Protection Against Viral Diseases in the old and frail
RULES: Keyword evidence for care (1.0) and fundamental_aging (1.0) is too close to call (margin 0.0 < 0.3; relative margin 0.000 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
The risk of severe illness or death from infections rises sharply after age 65, a group that makes
up about 20% of Sweden’s population. The biological reasons for this vulnerability remain unclear.
This project explores how aging affects antibody structure and function, focusing on their role in
protecting—or failing to protect—against respiratory viruses like Puumala virus, influenza A/B, and
RSV. Using samples from over 3,000 Swedish nursing home residents, the study investigates how
polyclonal antibody responses evolve and influence susceptibility in older adults. The first aim is
to uncover structural mechanisms of virus neutralization using electron microscopy to visualize
antibody-virus interactions and link them to binding and neutralization data. The second aim
examines how antibody glycosylation changes with age, using mass spectrometry to analyze long-term
serum samples from PUUV-infected individuals and elderly residents exposed to respiratory viruses.
The third aim assesses antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of infection in aging populations
through large-scale screening of capillary blood, correlating results with glycosylation profiles,
clinical outcomes, and mortality. These studies aim to close key knowledge gaps in immune aging and
identify mechanisms that influence vulnerability to respiratory infections in the elderly.

=== [28] swecris:2024-00658_Vinnova | 2024 | EUR 0.36M | Vinnova
TITLE: Enhancing AI Security with Federated Learning and Advanced Honeypots
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Purpose and goal: This project aims to develop a novel framework for AI security in decentralized
learning environments by means of incorporating honeypots into federated learning networks. This
will be a starting point in understanding and identifying yet unknown threats and create resilient
AI solutions for Swedish organizations. Expected results and effects: 1. A security framework that
incorporates adaptive Honeypots into federated learning networks. 2. An analysis and set of
methodologies for assessing the effectiveness and longevity of Honeypots´ deception capabilities
within decentralized learning networks. 3. The design of adaptive Honeypots for use in the security
framework described above. Approach and implementation: ** Denna text är maskinöversatt ** The
project is carried out in 4 work packages (AP). AP1 consists of project management and project
advice by senior leaders from the project parties involved. AP2: Develops the framework where
adaptive Honeypots will be included as a main component AP3: Develops adaptive Honeypots AP4: Works
with AI Swedens partners to ensure that they are given the opportunity to follow the project and
share the results.

=== [29] swecris:P21-0139_RJ | 2022 | EUR 0.36M | Riksbankens Jubileumsfond
TITLE: An age-old advantage? Healthy aging in two centuries of Swedish and Dutch long-lived families (1813-2021)
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
A growing part of the population lives to an increasingly high age, but the years spent in good
physical and mental health – the healthy life expectancy – lags behind. To reduce societal health
care costs, increase well-being of the elderly, and increase the healthy life span it is of crucial
importance to study the mechanisms of healthy aging. We study long-lived families which are
characterized by multiple generations of exceptional survival and health in old age to establish
which mechanisms contribute to healthy aging within the changing disease environment of the past
centuries. The purpose of the project is to study the changing contribution of mechanisms related to
socioeconomic resources, life style, and familial robustness to exceptional survival and healthy
aging. We use a unique combination of sources: For Sweden, historical parish registers linked to
modern national register data and for the Netherlands survey and medical data covering medical
diagnoses, lifestyle and biomarker information collected among individuals from long-lived families.
Using historical records, we identify members of long-lived families. We study their survival during
epidemic disease outbreaks and their causes of death historically until today. We further study
hospitalization and morbidity trajectories. The interdisciplinary project generates new insights
into the mechanisms of healthy aging and moves beyond existing research by focusing on familial
factors in healthy aging.

=== [30] swecris:2015-05997_VR | 2016 | EUR 0.36M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: The Swedish Mammography Cohort (SMC, est. 1987) - maintenance and data collection
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
The Swedish Mammography Cohort (SMC) is a population-based, longitudinal study on healthy aging and
chronic diseases in relation to diet and other lifestyle factors and genetic predisposition. The
cohort includes over 61,000 women who have responded to several extensive questionnaires, enabling
studies to take into account changes in behavior over time. The mission-and-vision-driven SMC has
the overarching goal to improve individual and population health. The SMC is a 30 year old database
which, via linkages to Swedish health registers, enables the study of a large number of diseases
that are of major public health concern. This research gold mine, built up in collaboration with
Uppsala University and Clinical Research Center Västerås, provides an important contribution to
medical research (50 publications yearly). The quality, impact and productivity of the SMC have been
of highest international standards. Evidence of the extremely high scientific value of the SMC is
shown by past work (scored “Outstanding” in External Research Evaluation 2010) and by award winning
PhD projects. Scientific development is advised by experts from Harvard and Oxford. In the present
application we apply for financial support for maintenance and for further development of the SMC:
1) update exposure information; 2) expand exposure data; 3) continue cognitive test interviews; 4)
perform pilot study for multigeneration study; 5) continue clinical data collection.

=== [31] swecris:2023-01396_Formas | 2024 | EUR 0.36M | Formas
TITLE: Ovary development in chickens: Molecular and cellular regulation
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Although the pivotal role of the Y chromosome in mammals is well-established, the importance of the
W chromosome in birds remains incompletely understood. Investigating W-linked genes in sex
determination and ovary development in chickens, we re-analyzed publicly available RNA-seq datasets,
utilizing an improved W chromosome assembly. We identified two W-linked candidate genes exclusively
expressed in ovarian pre-granulosa cells during sex determination, suggesting their role in ovary
development.This project aims to study the functions of these candidate genes. To achieve this, we
will use CRISPR-Cas9 technology to delete these genes in chickens and study the resulting ovarian
phenotypes and gene expression changes. This project will advance our understanding of the
mechanisms underlying sex determination and ovary development in chickens.Chicken eggs are a major
protein source for humans. The knowledge gained from this project can serve as a basis for
developing strategies to improve egg production, increase laying longevity, and reduce laying
abnormalities. This project will contribute to the reproductive health of laying hens, crucial for
sustainable poultry farming.

=== [32] swecris:P14-0477:1_RJ | 2015 | EUR 0.35M | Riksbankens Jubileumsfond
TITLE: Government Programs and Life Cycle Labor Supply: A Macroeconomic Analysis of Education Finance, Family Policies and Social Security
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Faced with aging populations, governments around the world are wondering how to boost employment.
Our on-going work focuses on the role of social insurance in accounting for the differing labor
supply patterns of older individuals. We want to extend our analysis to government programs
affecting younger individuals. We are interested in the role of education finance in accounting for
the cross-country differences in college attainment and employment of young adults. Can the lack of
tuitions explain the long study times in Nordic countries? What is the role of taxes/transfers and
credit constraints in accounting for the relatively low employment and college attainment rates in
Southern Europe? We wish to study the effect of government policies on household labor supply, skill
accumulation and fertility. Swedish policies appear successful in boosting female employment, but a
significant gender wage gap persists. Are the policies that promote employment (subsidized daycare
and the option of a reduced workweek when kids are young) partially responsible? What is their
affect on fertility? Moreover, can the cross-country differences in government policies account for
the cross-country differences in female employment and fertility? Our goal is to understand how
individuals respond to various government programs, thereby guiding policymakers in designing
incentives to boost employment. Our approach is to develop life cycle models where we simulate the
behavior of individuals.

=== [33] swecris:2022-01122_Forte | 2023 | EUR 0.35M | Forte
TITLE: POST COVID-19 CONDITON AS A THREAT TO HEALTHY AGEING:  A RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL OF YOGA TO IMPROVE QUALITY OF LIFE
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Background: Post COVID-19 condition (or long COVID) is a newly recognized health condition that
lasts for at least two months and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis (WHO, 2022).
Common symptoms include fatigue, breathlessness, and impaired cognition (‘brain fog’). Pain is
frequently reported, and sleep quality is often reduced. Over time, these symptoms have a
detrimental effect on quality of life and mental health. Sweden and India have experienced major
COVID-19 epidemics. In both countries, middle-aged and older adults have been disproportionately
affected. Recent estimates suggest that ~25,000 Swedish adults have subsequently been diagnosed with
post COVID. Physical activity (PA) levels are reduced in most people affected by post COVID, which
increases the risk of multimorbidity. Conventional exercise (e.g., running) is not suitable for many
of those affected. Yoga is shown to have positive effects on many of the symptoms associated with
post COVID and could help those affected to regain PA levels and improve quality of life. Aim: To
improve long-term health-related quality of life (HR-QoL) and promote healthy ageing in middle-aged
and older adults (aged 50–75 years) with post COVID using yoga-based exercise. Methods: We will
conduct a randomized controlled trial (n=115) to compare the effects of a 12-week yoga intervention
to a health promotion intervention for post COVID. Both interventions will be offered as adjuncts to
usual care administered by a physician. The primary outcome is HR-QoL (SF-36). Secondary outcomes
include self-reported fatigue, breathing difficulty, anxiety and depressive symptoms and cognition.
Changes will be assessed on three occasions: baseline, post-intervention (12-weeks), and 6-month
follow-up. A comparable intervention will be implemented in India and the results compared. A
cost-effectiveness study is planned.Our Indian collaborators are experts in the design and
assessment of yoga interventions; knowledge that will be transferred to Sweden during the project.
India will benefit from collaborative ties with Karolinska Institutet, and from methodological
expertise. Our team includes experts in rehabilitation medicine, physical activity, neuropsychology,
and international health. The PI in Sweden has a track record evaluating the health effects of yoga
interventions in middle aged and older adults, including his recent Sweden-India collaboration,
FitForAge (2017-20)

=== [34] swecris:2023-00155_Formas | 2023 | EUR 0.35M | Formas
TITLE: Construction collaborations and housing cooperatives in cities and rural areas for socially sustainable housing (BästBO)
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
The project is specified through a threefold aim. The first aim includes contributing knowledge on
how construction cooperatives and collective housing can contribute to sustainable social
infrastructures. The second aim is to identify obstacles and possibilities for succesful
construction collaborations and housing cooperatives. The third aim is to spread knowledge and
develop methods based on empirical research for support aimed at construction collaborations and
housing cooperatives. One of the project´s goals is to test and develop a methodology for the
mobilization and support of goups, at all stages, namely - start-up, construction and management
phase.The project aims to research how housing cooperatives can contribute to reducing involuntary
loneliness, increased integration, and how construction cooperatives can contribute with sustainable
housing solutions for the elderly in rural areas. The project´s target group are groups who, for
various reasons, have difficulties the regular housing market. These groups can benefit from the
solutions offered by construction cooperatives and housing co-ops. Collective housing or other forms
of housing communities are far from new, however, from a societal perspective, they can contribute
to addressing contemporary and future sustainability issues in terms of resources used for
construction and heating and thereby contribute to a sustainable society.

=== [35] swecris:2018-04468_VR | 2019 | EUR 0.35M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Immunity to malaria: importance of parasite diversity and host memory
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Malaria is a potentially fatal infection in non-immune individuals. An efficacious vaccine is
urgently needed. Given the extensive diversity of many of the potential vaccine targets, it is
important to begin to understand how this diversity can be overcome to inform vaccine development.
The aim of this project is to elucidate the mechanisms of acquisition and maintenance of immunity to
malaria, focusing on antigen diversity and immunological memory. A novel innovative assay that
allows for analyses of MBC responses against multiple antigens simultaneously and cross-reactivity
on cellular level will be used. The studies are performed in well-defined and closely monitored
cohorts in Kenya, as well as travellers in Sweden. Individuals returning from the tropics, and who
are subsequently treated for malaria in a malaria-free area offer a unique opportunity to study
infection and immunological memory in the absence of re-exposure. We will assess the breadth,
magnitude and longevity of humoral and cellular immune responses in individuals with first and
repeated infections. We will study how the preexisting immune repertoire predicts the outcome of an
infection in semi-immune adult volunteers in Kenya. In a cohort of children we will assess these
antimalrial immune responses and how coinfecting asymptomatic malaria infections impacts on the
immune responses and outcome. The overall aim is to contribute to the development of an efficacious
multicomponent vaccine against malaria.

=== [36] swecris:2022-00708_Forte | 2023 | EUR 0.35M | Forte
TITLE: Ageing without family - who cares?
RULES: Keyword evidence for social_population_aging (0.714) and care (0.667) is too close to call (margin 0.047 < 0.3; relative margin 0.066 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
The immediate family – partner and children – is a central resource for emotional and practical
support to older adults, and its members often act as advocates for older adults in relation to
public authorities. Older adults without immediate family are at high risk of missing such support.
The purpose of this project is to study the consequences of growing old without immediate family,
with a particular focus on wellbeing and support network.The research questions are based on three
themes: 1) Health and wellbeing among older adults without immediate family, 2) The support networks
of the group and the forms of support that these networks provide, 3) The older adults´ own
experiences of ageing and wellbeing, and how these are shaped by support networks and earlier life
experiences. In the project we will use two data sets to study these themes: 1) A nationally
representative set of survey data (SWEOLD) in which the living conditions of older (75+) Swedes have
been followed in six waves since 1992. 2) A set of qualitative and biographical interviews with
older adults 75+ with no immediate family. These two data sets will complement each other by
combining representative data about the studied group with knowledge based on the group’s own
narratives and experiences.The project will produce new knowledge about a group of older people that
is of special importance for the planning and realization of support to older adults living in the
community – a group on which there has been little research done both nationally and
internationally. Demographics shows that tor future generations of older adults it will become
increasingly common to grow old without immediate family. At the same time the current
staying-in-place policy combined with demands for rationalization of elder care has placed higher
demands on the immediate family to provide support for older family members. This actualizes the
need for more knowledge about older adults without immediate family. The project will also
contribute to making the group visible and challenge established and possibly dated assumptions
about older people’s family lives.

=== [37] swecris:2024-00181_VR | 2024 | EUR 0.35M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: COGNITIVE PROCESSING IN VISUAL SEARCH: The effect of ageing and dynamic environments
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Imagine exploring a new urban environment. How does your mobility affect your ability to detect cars
on the street, or navigate among pedestrians? Processing relevant information from the surrounding
environment is affected by diverse factors such as the lighting conditions, clutter of the street,
or one´s personal skills based on age. This research investigates humans´ cognitive processing of
visual information as it naturally occurs in everyday activities e.g., wayfinding, driving, and
exploration. We analyze multimodal visual search, encompassing gaze, body movements, and brain
activity in order to explore humans´ advanced abilities to adapt and cope with complex situations.
Using virtual reality, we replicate everyday activities in which people actively search for targets
in their surroundings based on the paradigm of visual foraging. Particularly we investigate (a) the
effect of self-movement on search performance, (b) the role of environmental complexity, and (c) the
effect of ageing. This interdisciplinary project combines methods from cognitive psychology,
neuroscience, and virtual reality technologies to explore human visual search in naturalistic
continuous tasks. Research outcomes will be instrumental in the design of personalised cognitive
rehabilitation and training of older adults. Based and hosted in Sweden, this research will be
performed in close collaboration with foreign labs in Iceland and France.

=== [38] swecris:2024-00448_VR | 2024 | EUR 0.35M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Mechanisms governing plasma cell selection and longevity
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
All vaccines in routine use primarily confer protection by inducing antibodies, however the
durability of protection varies based on the vaccine platform. Long-lived plasma cells in the bone
marrow are terminally differentiated B cells that constitutively secrete antibodies into the
circulation. Their life span varies from months to decades, but the mechanisms regulating their
longevity are not well understood. Whereas B cells carrying high-affinity B cell receptors (BCRs)
are enriched in the plasma cell compartment, plasma cell selection is not solely governed by the BCR
affinity. Moreover, immunogen structure itself and the innate immune stimulation appear to modulate
the plasma cell survival. Deciphering the molecular pathways that shape selection and promote
survival of plasma cells could be used to support development of vaccines and other therapies
targeting antibody-secreting cells. In the present study, we will employ novel transgenic mouse
models developed by Dr. Nussenzweig’s group which enable lineage tracing of plasma cells over
extended periods of time. Through a combination of immunological, molecular, and biophysical
approaches, we will seek to understand how plasma cells are selected during the germinal center
reaction, and what contributes to their survival in the bone marrow niche. Together, this study will
be used to gain mechanistic insight into plasma cell biology and can provide novel pathways to
target for induction of durable antibody responses.

=== [39] swecris:2015-05318_VR | 2016 | EUR 0.35M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Marine aerosol influence on clouds in the high Arctic
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
The goal of this project is to investigate if local emissions of aerosol particles from the ocean
surface govern the background state of clouds in the summertime high Arctic. This knowledge is
fundamental for understanding the response of Arctic clouds to different perturbations, for example
increased air pollution or enhanced levels of greenhouse gases. The Arctic is currently warming
considerably faster than the rest of the world. Clouds over the Arctic pack ice area can persist for
several days and are crucial for the surface energy budget, which controls whether sea ice will
freeze or melt. The longevity of Arctic clouds is surprising as they predominantly consist of both
liquid droplets and ice crystals, a mixture that is unstable and should make the clouds dissipate.
Aerosol particles are necessary to form cloud droplets and ice crystals, but the source of aerosols
that dominates the cloud-forming process in the summertime high Arctic is still not well known.
Current climate models have problems representing Arctic cloud conditions and thus the surface
energy budget. Our hypothesis is that aerosol particles emitted from open leads (water channels) in
the pack ice are crucial for governing the background state of Arctic clouds. Consequently, the
aerosol sources, and their droplet and ice forming potential, need to be adequately addressed in
climate models. Using a three-dimensional large-eddy simulation model, uniquely developed with the
aim to study the complex processes governing Arctic cloud properties, we will simulate in detail the
evolution of Arctic clouds and compare the model results with observations. Making use of unique
high-quality data, extending over decades and obtained from past successful expeditions to the high
Arctic, we will extract information on the fluxes of aerosols from the open leads in the pack ice as
well as their cloud droplet nucleating properties. With the model, we will examine if a surface
source of aerosols can sustain the clouds and how different input parameters, both meteorological
and chemical, affect the cloud properties. As no data on the ice crystal forming potential of marine
Arctic Ocean aerosols currently exist, laboratory experiments will be performed as a complement to
the already available in-situ measurements. These experiments will be a collaborative effort with
ETH-Zurich, Switzerland, using a combined aerosol immersion and ice nucleation chamber. Based on the
results obtained from the comparison between the simulations and the observations, the numerical
descriptions for cloud droplet activation and ice crystal formation will be evaluated and revised,
to consider the most crucial processes while still being suitable for application in global models.
The results will provide novel insights on the complex processes governing cloud properties in one
of the climatically most sensitive regions of the world. The project extends over four years and is
led by Dr. Annica Ekman, an expert in cloud-aerosol interactions and their numerical modelling at
both the small (large-eddy simulation) and the global (climate model) scales. She has solid
experience in integrating observations and models, and is collaborating on a national and
international level with both experimental and modelling aerosol-cloud-climate interaction experts.
The large-eddy simulation model applied in the project has been developed by Dr. Ekman and her
research group. Co-leader of the project will be Prof. Caroline Leck, a world-leading expert on
biogeochemical processes in the Arctic and with extensive previous experience of managing large
multidisciplinary/institutional Arctic research programs. The project resources will mainly be used
to fund a PhD student. Our collaborative partner at ETH-Zurich, Switzerland will be Prof. Ulrike
Lohmann.

=== [40] swecris:2023-00068_Formas | 2023 | EUR 0.34M | Formas
TITLE: Vibration-based Assessment of municipal pipe NETworks for IoT-enabled real-time monitoring and machine learning-aided maintenance planning (VA-NET)
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Keeping track of the status of pipe networks for drinking water and sewage is time consuming and
costly, partly because they are located underground. At the same time, parts of these pipe networks
are aging and have structural problems such as leakages, sagging and corrosion. This, in turn, leads
to operational problems. A significant problem is that sewer pipes is infiltration from groundwater,
precipitation and exfiltration from the drinking water pipes into the sewer pipes. This so-called
infiltration and inflow correspond to the same amount as the wastewater produced in households and
other activities and twice the volume that is transported, pumped and purified in Sweden, due to a
substandard sewage management system. This leads to increased electricity, and chemical use for
transport and purification and increased volumes of untreated wastewater to lakes and streams. Poor
status of the pipe network can also cause sediment deposits and sewer blockages, which in turn can
cause basement flooding.Today´s most widely accepted technique for examining the status of sewer
networks is to use a video camera that is manually inserted into the pipe network and films the
pipes while an operator simultaneously observes and assesses pipe defects. This is time consuming,
costly and subjective. The goal may be for a medium-sized municipality to come back and film the
pipes every ten years. In smaller municipalities with few resources, the status of the pipes has
never been systematically investigated since they were constructed several decades ago. Therefore,
there is a need to investigate and develop other methods to be able to investigate the status of the
pipe networks faster and cheaper. One such method could be to make vibration measurements and
acoustic analyses of the pipe networks. An advantage of such a method is that there is no need to go
down the pipe network, and faster diagnosis of pipe status. This would make it easier for water and
wastewater organizations to work with proactive maintenance. Acoustic methods have been used to find
leakages in drinking water networks and gas pipes also to investigate the status of for example, dam
and bridge structures. However, today vibration methods for assessing the status of sewer networks
do not exist.The overall goal of this project is to investigate the potential of using vibration
measurements to investigate the status of sewer networks and, by extension, to develop a method that
continuously assesses the status of the pipes with real-time measurements and machine learning
algorithms. In this project, a method will be developed to collect and analyze vibration/acoustic
data from primarily gravity pipes. The work includes selecting appropriate sensors and frequency
ranges and carrying out modeling of the collected data. Furthermore, the chosen method will be
tested on a pipe network that is built up in the lab to identify typical patterns that the signals
give for different types of structural wiring defects. Based on the results from the lab, the method
will also be tested in the field. There we will make acoustic measurements on pipes that have also
been flushed and filmed. The results from the acoustic measurements will be compared with the
results from the filming. Based on the results of lab and field measurements, recommendations for
further development of IoT-based real-time measurements and analysis will be given.This project will
be carried out in collaboration between Luleå University of Technology (LTU) and the water and
sewerage department at Boden municipality and the water and sewerage companies MittSverige Vatten &
Avfall, Tekniska Verken in Linköping and Luleå miljöresurs. LTU is represented by scientists from
Water and Wastewater Technology and Acoustics. The municipal actors will provide input on which
defects should be prioritized to be investigated and contribute with appropriate pipe locations for
field measurements. That part includes human resources in the fi

=== [41] swecris:P24-0009_RJ | 2025 | EUR 0.33M | Riksbankens Jubileumsfond
TITLE: Sign language abilities of older deaf and hard of hearing individuals in Sweden.
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
This study aims to examine the linguistic and cognitive spatial abilities in a sample of older
signers, representative of the older signing population in Sweden. The linguistic skills of older
signers, an under-researched and vulnerable group, are poorly documented, posing challenges for
healthcare workers and sign language interpreters. Sign languages draw on spatial cognitive
resources to a larger extent than spoken languages, rendering research on spoken language
insufficient to inform us fully about the linguistic skills of older signers. Consequently,
misdiagnosis and communication issues present risks for older signers. Another concern is that many
older signers experienced delayed exposure to an initial language during childhood. The effect of
this delay on their later years remains unclear. The following research questions guide this study:
(1) Are STS and spatial skills in older signers significantly affected by aging? (2) Does delayed
initial language exposure significantly affect STS and spatial skills in older signers? The study
will compare the linguistic and spatial cognitive skills in a sample of older signers with those in
a sample of younger adult signers, alongside background information. The findings will provide
insights into healthy aging among older deaf signers. This will aid in developing tools for
assessing linguistic and cognitive impairments, and help interpreters and healthcare workers better
address older signers' communication needs

=== [42] swecris:2024-01444_Forte | 2025 | EUR 0.33M | Forte
TITLE: Personalised diet for healthier longevity: the role of dietary changes, sensitive windows of exposure, and psychosocial background
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Research problem and specific questions: dietary recommendations considering older adults’ needs can
contribute to healthier, longer lives, but evidence from context-specific, large-scale studies is
limited. We will leverage Swedish multicohort data to answer three research questions: 1) Which
dietary recommendations could have the highest impact on healthy longevity?, 2) What is the most
sensitive window of exposure to said foods and how long are the latency periods?, and 3) How are the
benefits from dietary recommendations influenced by older adults’ psychosocial background?Data and
method: we will use data from 5 cohorts belonging to the NEAR research infrastructure: SNAC-K,
SNAC-N, SNAC-S, H70, and SMCC, and replicate the analyses in datasets from Spain and the United
Kingdom (n=25,500). Data will be harmonised by NEAR and processed by the applicant, who has a proven
track record in multicohort analyses. Dietary variables will mirror the 14 food groups from the
Swedish Food Agency guidelines. Healthy longevity will be operationalised as time to death or poor
health as per the Health Assessment Tool (i.e., a composite score of physical and cognitive
function, chronic diseases, and disability), and analytical techniques will include substitution
models simulating food replacements, interactions with age and exposure lagging, and factorial
designs combining socioeconomic status and social network.Societal relevance and utilisation:
suboptimal diet in Swedish older adults accounts for 13,400 deaths per year and 187,000
disability-adjusted life-years. The ultimate goal of the project is to contribute to the
personalisation of the Swedish dietary guidelines to the needs of older adults. Project results will
be disseminated through 3 scientific publications, congress communications, a magazine for older
adults, and workshops at the Swedish Food Agency.Plan for project realisation: necessary data have
been collected and are available for request and processing. The project plan has been approved by
the supporting research team and will be implemented over a period of 3 years with minimal overlaps
between study aims (i.e., 13 months for data management and 10, 8, and 7 months for aims one, two,
and three). The budget will correspond largely to the salary of the applicant, that of a research
assistant, and running costs, as salaries of other participants are covered by their respective
organisations.

=== [43] swecris:P2024-00995_Energi | 2024 | EUR 0.33M | Swedish Energy Agency
TITLE: Long lifetime drive inverter for heavy-duty electric vehicles (LongDrive)
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
The project aims to develop technologies for long lifetime drive inverter with high power density
for electrified heavy duty vehicles. The project will help Swedish automotive industry and academia
to design and control electric drive systems for enhanced endurance, robustness, and reliability.
The degradation models of the inverter and its key components will be developed depending on load
intensity, load periods, and duty conditions. In the design process, the degradation models can be
used for component selection and dimension to meet the expected longevity. The control strategies of
the inverter optimized to extend the lifetime and reach the guaranteed service time will be
developed. In vehicle service time, the state of health of the inverter and its key components will
be evaluated online based on their degradation models and measurement operational data. The
degradation models and control strategies will be verified with both simulations and partly by
experiments.

=== [44] swecris:P32519-3_Energi | 2015 | EUR 0.33M | Swedish Energy Agency
TITLE: Prediction of thermoplastic ageing in biofuels
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
The use of bio based fuels has increased and the diversity of the used fuels increase, the long
experience of fossile fuels is less helpful when predicting expected life time of fuelsystems. New
and improved tolls are needed to develop reliable fuel systems available to cope with future fuels.
This project aims to develop a "toolbox" for CAE based life time prediction of ageing of fuelsystem
components.

=== [45] swecris:2020-03810_VR | 2021 | EUR 0.32M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Deleterious age-amplified mutations and the evolution of ageing
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Ever since Medawar and Williams published their tremendously influential theories of the evolution
of ageing half a century ago (Mutation Accumulation [MA] and Antagonistic Pleiotropy [AP],
respectively), evolutionary geneticists have been locked into the idea that ageing is exclusively
generated by two specific subclasses of mutations. Both classes cause ageing through late-life
deleterious effects, but differ in how they affect early-life performance (MA neutrally and AP
positively). Evidence in favor of each class have been found, but consistent observations of
positive pleiotropy between early- and late-life performance are difficult to reconcile with either
theory. This proposal is centered around the novel hypothesis that deleterious mutations show
increasing negative effects with age, a possibility predicted from recent ageing theory, indirectly
supported by past experiments, and directly supported by preliminary data from my laboratory.
Deleterious mutations with age-amplified negative effects resolve the paradox of how ageing evolves
under positive pleiotropy, and in contrast to established theories suggest that virtually all
deleterious mutations may contribute to ageing. In this proposal I outline a research program
designed to comprehensively test this novel hypothesis, using several Drosophila melanogaster model
systems. The proposed research promises to transform our understanding of ageing: one of the most
fundamental yet least understood biological processes.

=== [46] swecris:2022-02569_VR | 2023 | EUR 0.32M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Ageing without family - who cares?
RULES: Keyword evidence for social_population_aging (0.714) and care (0.667) is too close to call (margin 0.047 < 0.3; relative margin 0.066 < 0.15 or evidence floor not met).
ABSTRACT:
The immediate family (IF) – partner and children – is a central resource for support to older
adults, and its members often act as advocates in relation to public authorities. Older adults
without IF are at high risk of missing such support. The purpose of this project is to study the
consequences of growing old without IF, with a particular focus on wellbeing and support network.We
study three themes connected to ageing without IF: 1) Health and wellbeing, 2) Support networks and
the forms of support these networks provide, 3) The older adults´ own experiences of ageing and
wellbeing, and how these are shaped by support networks and earlier life experiences. We use two
complementary data sets: 1) Nationally representative survey data (SWEOLD) in which the living
conditions of older (75+) Swedes have been followed in six waves since 1992. 2) A set of qualitative
interviews with older adults 75+ with no IF.It will become increasingly common to grow old without
IF, still there has been very little research done on the group. The current stay-in-place policy
combined with demands for elder care rationalization has placed higher demands on IF to provide
support for older family members, potentially making older people without IF vulnerable. The project
will contribute knowledge about the growing minority of older people without IF, that is important
for the planning and realization of municipal support, and for updating potentially dated
assumptions about the group.

=== [47] swecris:2022-02991_VR | 2023 | EUR 0.32M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Indoor biomass burning contributes to significant particulate matter exposure, chronic human health burden, and an economic drain in rural households
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Biomass burning for cooking and heating produces a toxic cocktail of particulate matter (PM) and
gaseous pollutants, resulting in chronic lung issues. Around 0.5-0.6 million deaths occur annually
in India, mainly in the Indo-Gangetic Plains, from exposure to indoor air pollutants, indicating the
multifaceted healthcare, economic and environmental burden in households, where biomass burning
prevails. And yet, ground-based indoor exposure data are sparse, there is poor awareness about air
pollution, and clean energy initiatives are lagging. We hypothesize that biomass combustion and PM
exposure is related to specific pollutant classes (triggers) and their synergistic interactions,
which trace early metabolic changes in plasma to diagnose asthma, lung aging, and chronic pulmonary
obstructions. We aim to 1) conduct socioeconomic and health surveys and develop real-time indoor
pollutant monitoring using automated sensor networks, 2) analyze organic compounds and oxidative
metals that cause pulmonary stress, and 3) identify novel biomarkers in plasma and combine this with
integrative transcriptomics, epidemiological and environmental chemical data. The proposed
synergistic and integrated work packages on PM characteristics and metabolomics will establish
causality with exposure posing a breakthrough for early clinical diagnosis. This strategy will help
healthcare measures and mitigation plans advance the UN Sustainable Development Goals 3 and 7 for
better air quality and health.

=== [48] swecris:2017-04472_VR | 2018 | EUR 0.31M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Ageing of filled elastomers: Filling the gap from simple observations to physically realistic models
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
Almost all commercially available elastomer products are made of carbon black filler reinforced
elastomers. Recently, it is observed that filled elastomers exhibit structural relaxation (physical
ageing) within a very important rubber region frequency range. At structural relaxation, the
elastomer displays continuously shifting mechanical properties over slow time scales after a
temperature alteration. It is utterly important that this physical ageing is appropriately modelled,
not only to be able to predict physical ageing itself, but, and more importantly; to at all be able
to predict the mechanical properties of the most commonly used elastomer, over the most commonly
used frequency range. Surprisingly, there exist no suitable physical ageing models for filled
elastomers. In this project, suitable, physically sound and novel physical ageing models are
developed for filled elastomers. Furthermore, novel models for the most common chemical ageing for
filled elastomer are developed. Finally, dynamic stiffness of a vibration isolator of filled
elastomer within the audible frequency range, undergoing physical and chemical ageing, is determined
by the derived constitutive equations and finite element method. The project team is very suitable
for the proposed project where the project plan is divided into four well connected subtasks of
which the last is enabling the PhD student for international research exchange and to network,
suiting very well the overall aims of VR projects.

=== [49] swecris:2019-05062_VR | 2020 | EUR 0.31M | Swedish Research Council
TITLE: Counting soot particles - Number concentrations and sources in Swedish background air
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
This project focuses on characterizing the number concentration and properties of soot (black
carbon) particles in background air in southern Sweden in order to constrain the sources and the
controlling processes.Our previous studies indicate that a majority of all soot particles in
background air in southern Sweden are aged and coated with a significant amount of secondary
inorganic and organic material enough to considerably modify their health and climate impacts.Our
advanced and unique combination of aerosol instrumentation allows us to measure the relevant
properties of individual soot particles. We will determine soot core size, mass, structure and
effective density, as well as soot coating thickness and chemical composition.The observations will
enable us to determine the number concentration and number fraction of soot (black carbon) particles
in background air and their degree of atmospheric ageing. The data will also be used to determine
size-resolved dry and wet deposition velocities and geographical source regions.The soot data will
be compared with model output from our detailed Lagrangian aerosol dynamics and atmospheric
chemistry model ADCHEM to test current European soot emission estimates and model predictive
skill.An assessment of the impact of soot on climate and human health will be made through the use
of relevant proxies.Results will be communicated primarily via MERGE, the Strategic Research Area on
climate and Earth system modelling.

=== [50] swecris:P24-0820_RJ | 2025 | EUR 0.31M | Riksbankens Jubileumsfond
TITLE: Health inequalities in cognitive aging: Studies of education, socioeconomic childhood circumstances, and genetic predispositions
RULES: An ageing anchor is present but no category keyword matches, so the text does not support any substantive category.
ABSTRACT:
The aim of the project is to increase the understanding of the role of education for cognitive
ability and cognitive disease in later life, by examining how the interplay between genetic
predispositions and educational attainment influences health inequalities. This is done by testing
direct and indirect effects and selection mechanisms by assessing the interplay between genes and
environment, the impact of early socioeconomic factors, and cohort differences. Over the past
century, higher education has become much more common in Sweden and is formally available to
everyone. Still, significant socioeconomic disparities exist in Sweden, both in terms of education
and cognitive aging. Overlooking our different abilities can lead to exacerbated inequalities.
Genetic factors contributing to inequalities should not be understood as deterministic; instead,
they emphasize the importance of supportive environments. A better understanding of modifiable
factors underlying differences in cognitive aging is highly relevant for individuals, families, and
society, as cognitive disease implies a loss for the individual as well as a social and economic
burden. The project is carried out by a research team with a background and extensive experience in
genetic epidemiology, gerontology, sociology, and public health. Several genetic and
population-based studies will be utilized, enabling both cross-sectional and longitudinal modeling
of outcomes.

